# 2023-02-23  William A. Hudson

# rgAltFuncName  Alternate Function Names class
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgAltFuncName  class -- Alternate Function Names

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 #include "rgAddrMap.h"
 #include "rgFselPin.h"
 #include "rgAltFuncName.h"

=head2			Essential Class members

 class rgAltFuncName {
  public:
    rgAltFuncName();                    // constructor

    static const char*          cstr_altfunc_bit(
	rgFselPin::rgFsel_enum      mode,
	int                         bit
    );
 };


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This class provides Alternate Function names for all Gpio bits on the
Raspberry Pi BCM2711 (RPi4), and BCM2837 (RPi3) thru BCM2835.
It is pure name mapping and does not access any hardware registers.
It uses the rgRpiRev class to determine which model of Raspberry Pi to display.

The BCM doc has somewhat different function (signal) names.
Here we take the opportunity to make name modifications to create a somewhat
more systematic naming.

Each name has a lower-case prefix identifying the peripheral unit it belongs
to, followed by the upper-case signal name.  e.g. "iic0_SDA"
Unit numbers in braces {} replace the '0' in the Prefix.

Signal Name prefixes are:

    Prefix   Peripheral unit              Manpage
    ------   ---------------------------  ---------
    iic0_    I2C master {0..7}            rgIic(7)
    gp_      General Purpose Clocks       rgClk(7)
    pwm0_    Pulse Width Modulator {0,1}  rggPwm(7)
    spi0_    SPI master {0..6}            rgSpi0(7), rgUniSpi(7)
    u0_      UART {0..5}                  ??
    pcm_     Pulse Code Modulator         ??
    sm_      Secondary Memory
    dpi_     Display Parallel Interface
    bsc_     Broadcom Slave Controller
    sd0_     SD card {0,1}
    sdc_     SD card control (Undocumented)
    arm_     ARM JTAG interface
    miia_    Undocumented
    rgmii_   Undocumented

See the manpage or BCM doc for hardware signal name explanations.
Run command  "rgpio --rpi4 fsel --show -0 -1"  to see all signal names.

Special names:  (from the BCM doc)

    "--"  = reserved
    "**"  = do NOT USE, may have unexpected results

Note only Gpio bits {0..27} are available on the 40-pin header and thus of
primary interest to users.  The CM3 Compute Module provides access to some
additional Gpio bits.

=head2			Constructor

=over

=item B<rgAltFuncName>()

Construct a new object.  It has no data, but may be useful for accessing
the conversion functions.

=back


=head2			Alternate Function Name Lookup

These may be called as either Class methods or Object methods and are
implemented by static lookup tables.

=over

=item B<cstr_altfunc_bit>( mode, bit )

Return the alternate function c-string name for the given rgFsel_enum and Gpio
bit number.
Throw B<std::range_error> if Gpio bit number is invalid (i.e. > 53).

=back


=head1		EXCEPTIONS

 std::range_error


=head1		RETURN VALUE

Functions are either void, or return valid data.  Exceptions are thrown
where error conditions can be detected.


=head1		EXAMPLES

    #include "rgAltFuncName.h"

    rgAltFuncName	nx;	// object
    char*		cstr;

    cstr = rgAltFuncName::cstr_altfunc_bit( rgFselPin::f_Alt0, 4 );
    cstr =             nx.cstr_altfunc_bit( rgFselPin::f_Alt0, 4 );
	// Alt0 on Gpio4 is "gp_CLK0"


=head1		FILES

In the librgpio/ source tree:

 src/rgAltFuncName.h
 src/rgAltFuncName.cpp


=head1		SEE ALSO

 rgFselPin(3)
 rgRpiRev(3)
 librgpio(3)
 rgpio-fsel(1)
 rgpio-header(1)

 BCM doc:  BCM2835 ARM Peripherals (06 February 2012)
    p.89-101  ch 6. General Purpose I/O (GPIO)
    https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bcm2835/BCM2835-ARM-Peripherals.pdf

 BCM doc:  BCM2711 ARM Peripherals (18 Jan 2022)
    p.77-81  ch 5.3. Alternative Function Assignments
    http://datasheets.raspberrypi.org/bcm2711/bcm2711-peripherals.pdf

 CM3 Compute Module Datasheet
    https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/computemodule/datasheets/rpi_DATA_CM_2p0.pdf

=cut

