# 2019-11-07  William A. Hudson

# rgSpi0  Hardware Register Description.
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------

=head1		NAME

rgSpi0  Hardware Description -- SPI0 Master

=head1		SYNOPSIS

Hardware registers of the SPI0 peripheral.
All are 32-bits, but may have sparsely populated fields.
All are read-write, except those marked read-only (RO).

    Register	BCM name	Description
    --------	--------	------------------
    CntlStat	CS		Control and Status
    Fifo	FIFO		TX and RX FIFOs
    ClkDiv	CLK		Clock Divider
    DmaLen	DLEN		DMA Data Length
    Lossi	LTOH		LoSSI mode Control
    DmaReq	DC		DMA DREQ Controls

    Field Name		Register Bits    BCM name
    ---------------     -------------    --------
    LossiWord_1		CntlStat[25]     LEN_LONG  (non-existent)
    LossiDmaEn_1	CntlStat[24]     DMA_LEN   (non-existent)
    CsPolarity_3	CntlStat[23:21]  CSPOL2,CSPOL1,CSPOL0

    RxFullStop_1	CntlStat[20]     RXF    (RO)
    RxHalf_1		CntlStat[19]     RXR    (RO)
    TxHasSpace_1	CntlStat[18]     TXD    (RO)
    RxHasData_1		CntlStat[17]     RXD    (RO)
    TxEmpty_1		CntlStat[16]     DONE   (RO)

    LossiEnable_1	CntlStat[13]     LEN
    ReadEnable_1	CntlStat[12]     REN
    DmaEndCs_1		CntlStat[11]     ADCS
    IrqRxHalf_1		CntlStat[10]     INTR
    IrqTxEmpty_1	CntlStat[9]      INTD
    DmaEnable_1		CntlStat[8]      DMAEN
    RunActive_1		CntlStat[7]      TA
    CsPolarity_1	CntlStat[6]      CSPOL  (non-functional)
    ClearRxTxFifo_2	CntlStat[5:4]    CLEAR
    ClockPolarity_1	CntlStat[3]      CPOL
    ClockPhase_1	CntlStat[2]      CPHA
    ChipSelectN_2	CntlStat[1:0]    CS

    ClockDiv_16		ClkDiv[15:0]     CDIV

    DmaDataLen_16	DmaLen[15:0]     LEN

    LossiHoldDly_4	Lossi[3:0]       TOH

    DmaRxPanicLev_8	DmaReq[31:24]    RPANIC
    DmaRxReqLev_8	DmaReq[23:16]    RDREQ
    DmaTxPanicLev_8	DmaReq[15:8]     TPANIC
    DmaTxReqLev_8	DmaReq[7:0]      TDREQ

Bit field names incorporate the number of bits in the field, making the
field size self documenting.

Unspecified bit fields in each register are typically reserved, and should
be write as 0, and read as don't care.


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This documentation describes the operation of the SPI0 Master interface.
The universal SPI1, SPI2 masters are described elsewhere.
See BCM doc chapter 10 "SPI" (p. 148-159).

SPI stands for Serial Peripheral Interface bus.
The SPI0 Master is essentially a shift register controller.

There are 3 major modes of operation:  (BCM ch 10.6)

    A) Standard (Polled/Interrupt) mode
    B) LoSSI (Low Speed Serial Interface) mode
    C) DMA (Direct Memory Access) mode

There are two ways the data lines can be configured:  (BCM ch 10.4)

    A) MISO, MOSI - Two uni-directional lines as in Standard SPI.
    B) MIMO - Bidirectional on a single wire, the MOSI pin.


=head2			Hardware Signals

GPIO Alternate Function names (hardware signals):  The Spi0 peripheral can
be operated regardless of these signals being routed to GPIO pins.

    spi0_SCLK	Serial Clock, driven by master
    spi0_MOSI	Master Out Slave In  data
    spi0_MISO	Master In  Slave Out data
    spi0_CE0_n	Chip Enable 0 (driven by master)
    spi0_CE1_n	Chip Enable 1 (driven by master)

Generic SPI signals:  We use these names in describing timing.

    SCLK	Serial Clock, driven by master
    MOSI	Master Out Slave In  data
    MISO	Master In  Slave Out data
    CS 		Chip Select (also called CE Chip Enable)


=head2			Signal Timing

In these waveforms we reference the first (1) and second (2) edges of the
SCLK clock pulses.  The B<ClockPolarity_1> bit determines the SCLK idle state,
and thus the direction of edge1.

                       1 bit time
         idle | setup |<---->|         | hold | idle
          ____                                 ____________
    CS        |_______________________________|

                       __     __     __
    SCLK  ____________|  |___|  |___|  |___________________
              edge    1  2   1  2   1  2
		Normal clock  (ClockPolarity_1= 0), idle low

    MOSI       __________ ______ ______
    MISO  XXXXX__________X______X______XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
                     d7     d6 ... d0
		Change on 2, sample on 1 (ClockPhase_1= CPHA=0)

    MOSI               ______ ______ ______
    MISO  XXXXXXXXXXXXX______X______X______XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
                         d7     d6 ... d0
		Change on 1, sample on 2 (ClockPhase_1= CPHA=1)

          ____________    ___    ___    ___________________
    SCLK              |__|   |__|   |__|
              edge    1  2   1  2   1  2
		Inverted clock  (ClockPolarity_1= 1), idle high

Data is always sent and received MSB (Most Significant Bit) first.

The active period, when CS is low, is initiated by setting (RunActive_1= 1),
and ends by setting (RunActive_1= 0).


=head2			Hardware FIFO

The BCM documentation shows both the Tx and Rx FIFO as having 16 entries of
32-bits.  In Standard mode, these behave as 64 entries of 8-bits.

In LoSSI mode, a ninth bit is used (and transmitted) to indicate whether
the byte is a command or data.  Not sure how the FIFO is configured.

In DMA mode, not sure how the FIFO is configured.


=head1		REGISTER BIT FIELDS

The numeric suffix on the field name indicates the number of bits in the field.

=head2			CntlStat Register

Only the status bits are read-only (RO), all others are read-write.

=over

=item B<CsPolarity_3>       - Chip Select Polarity.

Configures the active level of each Chip Enable line, one bit for each,
left to right {CE2, CE1, CE0}:

 1= CS is active high
 0= CS is active low, the usual situation

Note CE2 line does not exist, but the bit can still be set.

=item B<RxFullStop_1>       - Rx Fifo Full and Tx stopped.  (RO)

 1= Rx Fifo is full and no further serial data will be sent.
 0= Rx Fifo is not full.

=item B<RxHalf_1>           - Rx Fifo Half full.  (RO)

 1= Rx Fifo is more than half full.
 0= Rx Fifo less than half full, OR not active (RunActive_1= 0).

Here "Half full" is fuzzy.  The BCM doc indicates half full may be 12 out of
16 entries of 32-bits, [equivalent to 48 out of 64 byte entries???].

=item B<TxHasSpace_1>       - Tx Fifo can accept data.  (RO)

 1= Tx Fifo has space for at least 1 byte.
 0= Tx Fifo is full.

=item B<RxHasData_1>        - Rx Fifo contains data.  (RO)

 1= Rx Fifo contains at least 1 byte.
 0= Rx Fifo is empty.

=item B<TxEmpty_1>          - Tx transfer done.  (RO)

 1= Tx Fifo is empty, transfer is complete.
 0= Transfer in progress, OR not active (RunActive_1= 0)

=item B<LossiEnable_1>      - LoSSI enable.

 1= LoSSI master.
 0= SPI master.

Controls serial interface configuration.

=item B<ReadEnable_1>       - Bidirectional mode MOSI Read Enable.

 1= Read from SPI slave.
 0= Write to  SPI slave, normal SPI.

Controls behavior of MOSI driver/receiver.
When 1, it tri-states the MOSI driver and reads serial data from MOSI instead
of MISO.  Tx Fifo data operates normally, but is not sent to the SPI slave,
since MOSI output is disabled.
[See table in Figure 10-6 Serial interface Block Diagram, p. 152]

This is the only control for Bidirectional mode.
Software must coordinate with the slave on the bus (MOSI) direction.
[See ch. 10.2.2 Bidirectional mode, p.149]

=item B<DmaEndCs_1>         - DMA auto deassert Chip Select.

 1= Auto deassert CS at end of DMA transfer (DmaDataLen_16)
 0= Not

Effective only in DMA mode.  When 0, software must manage CS.

=item B<IrqRxHalf_1>        - Interrupt on RxHalf_1.

 1= Generate interrupt while RxHalf_1=1
 0= Not

=item B<IrqTxEmpty_1>       - Interrupt on TxEmpty_1.

 1= Generate interrupt when TxEmpty_1=1
 0= Not

=item B<DmaEnable_1>        - DMA Enable.

 1= Enable DMA operation.
 0= Not

=item B<RunActive_1>        - Transfer Active.

Is both a control and a status bit.

0= Hardware lines are in idle state.  The chip select (CS) lines are all
inactive.  SCLK is in the idle state.
Both TxEmpty_1=0 and RxHalf_1=0 are forced, even if there is data left in
Tx or Rx Fifo.
Writes to the Fifo register are re-directed to select bits of CntlStat and
DmaLen registers (intended as a feature to allow DMA to set configuration
before sending data).

1= Hardware lines are active.  The chip select line specified by ChipSelectN_2
is in the active state (the others are idle).  Writes to the Fifo register
write data to the Tx Fifo, and reads read from the Rx Fifo.
This bit can also be cleared by a dma_frame_end pulse from the DMA controller.

=item B<CsPolarity_1>       - Chip Select Polarity.

 1= CS lines are active high
 0= CS lines are active low, the usual situation

Note this bit has storage, but appears non-functional.  The BCM doc does
not make clear how it would combine with CsPolarity_3 above.

=item B<ClearRxTxFifo_2>    - Clear Rx,Tx Fifo.

 0= No action.             (binary 00)
 1= Clear Tx.              (binary 01)
 2= Clear Rx.              (binary 10)
 3= Clear both Rx and Tx.  (binary 11)

Clear is a one-shot operation, the bits are automatically reset and always
read back as zero.

If both Clear and RunActive_1 are set at the same time,
the Fifo is cleared before the new frame is started.

=item B<ClockPolarity_1>    - Clock Polarity (CPOL in SPI nomenclature).

 1= SCLK idle state is high.
 0= SCLK idle state is low.

=item B<ClockPhase_1>       - Clock Phase (CPHA in SPI nomenclature).

 1= SCLK edge1 is on data bit change,    sample on edge2.
 0= SCLK edge1 is in middle of data bit, sample on edge1.

=item B<ChipSelectN_2>      - Chip select line to activate.

    0 = CE0_n
    1 = CE1_n
    2 = CE2_n		(does not exist)
    3 = Reserved

Two-bit value encoding the hardware line to be activated when RunActive_1=1.

=back

=head2			Fifo Register

Reads and Writes normally access the Rx and Tx FIFO with the usual side
effects, but have special behavior when RunActive_1= 0.

A Read will remove and return one byte from the Rx (Receive FIFO), and
the corresponding Rx status flags are updated.

When RunActive_1= 1:  A Write will copy the LSB byte into the Tx FIFO, and
update the corresponding Tx status flags.

When RunActive_1= 0:  A Write will instead update the CntlStat and DmaLen
registers as follows:  (regardless of DmaEnable_1)

    DmaLen[15:0]
	DmaDataLen_16       = write[31:16]

    CntlStat[23:21,7:0]
	CsPolarity_3        = write[10:8]
	RunActive_1         = write[7]
	CsPolarity_1        = write[6]
	ClearRxTxFifo_2     = write[5:4]
	ClockPolarity_1     = write[3]
	ClockPhase_1        = write[2]
	ChipSelectN_2       = write[1:0]

In LoSSI mode, what happens???

=head2			ClkDiv Register

Bit fields are:

=over

=item B<ClockDiv_16>        - Clock Divider value for SCLK frequency.

SCLK frequency = (Core Clock frequency) / ClockDiv_16

If ClockDiv_16=0, the divisor is 65536 (0xffff).
The value should be a multiple of 2, but odd numbers are rounded down.
The maximum SPI clock rate is that of the APB clock. ???

=back

=head2			DmaLen Register

Bit fields are:

=over

=item B<DmaDataLen_16>      - DMA data length.

Is the number of bytes to transfer.
Valid only for DMA mode DmaEnable_1=1.

=back

=head2			Lossi Register

Bit fields are:

=over

=item B<LossiHoldDly_4>     - LoSSI output hold delay.

This sets the Output Hold delay in APB clocks.
A value of 0 causes a 1 clock delay.

=back

=head2			DmaReq Register

Controls the generation of the Request and Panic signals to an
external DMA engine.  The Request signals are generated when the FIFOs reach
their defined levels and need servicing.  The Panic signals instruct the
external DMA engine to raise the priority of its AXI requests.

=over

=item B<DmaRxPanicLev_8>    - DMA Read Panic Threshold.

=item B<DmaRxReqLev_8>      - DMA Read Request Threshold.

=item B<DmaTxPanicLev_8>    - DMA Write Panic Threshold.

=item B<DmaTxReqLev_8>      - DMA Write Request Threshold.

=back


=head1		FILES

In the librgpio/ source tree:

 src/rgSpi0.h
 src/rgSpi0.cpp


=head1		SEE ALSO

 rgSpi0(3)
 rgpio-spi0(1)

 BCM doc:  BCM2835 ARM Peripherals (06 February 2012)
 Chapter 10 "SPI" (p.148-159).
 https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bcm2835/BCM2835-ARM-Peripherals.pdf

 https://elinux.org/BCM2835_datasheet_errata

 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_Peripheral_Interface_Bus

=cut

