# 2024-09-25  William A. Hudson

# rgpio-fsel5 -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgpio-fsel -- IO Function Select, RPi5

=head1		SYNOPSIS

usage:  rgpio fsel5 [options..]  [gpio..]
    gpio                bit numbers {27..0}
    --gpio=0x0fffffff   mask to select Gpio[27:0] bits
  output format:
    --table             table only, fields for each Gpio
    --list              list only, function name for each Gpio
  IoCntl(gpio) field modification:
    --InOver_2=0        input override 0=norm, 1=invert, 2=low, 3=high
    --OutEnOver_2=0     output enable override ..
    --OutOver_2=0       output override ..
    --FilterM_7=4       filter time constant M {0..127}
    --FuncSel_5=31      function select {0..31}
    --func=31           alias for --FuncSel_5
  options:
    --show              show all alternate functions
    --help              show this usage
    -v, --verbose       verbose output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This command displays the Function Select mode of each Gpio pin specified.
In addition, it shows the logical control fields that affect the IO path
to the selected peripheral device.
Here "pin" or "bit" refers to the Gpio bit number, not the Raspberry Pi
header pin number.

The output shows the alternate function {a0, a1, .. a31}, along with the
peripheral function signal name.
The signal names generally have a prefix indicating the peripheral they
belong to.  The name '--' indicates a reserved function mode.

If modification is specified, the process for each Gpio bit is:

    1) Read current hardware register value.
    2) Modify the mode bits.
    3) Write modified value back to hardware register.

After all Gpios are modified, each hardware register is re-read and the
values displayed.

Note this read-modify-write sequence is not atomic.  It is left to the user
to avoid synchronization issues.

RPi5 has 4 Atomic Addresses (norm, flip, set, clr) for each register.
This command uses only the 'norm' address.  See B<rgpio-rcon>(1) for access
by all 4 addresses.


=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			Register Banks

There are 3 register banks.  Only Bank0, the Gpios on the 40-pin header,
is supported here.

=head2			Gpio Bits

Gpio bits (integers) may be enumerated on the command line, and are processed
for modification or display in the order specified.  See EXAMPLES.

=over

=item B<--gpio>=0x0fffffff  - Mask to select Gpio[27:0] bits.

This is a bit mask, where 1= a Gpio bit to be operated on.
Note bits [31:28] are ignored.

=back

=head2			Output Format

=over

=item B<--table>            - Table only, show fields for each Gpio.

Show only the table of field names and values for each Gpio bit.
Note argument bits, or --gpio, has no effect on the table output.

=item B<--list>             - List only, show function name for each Gpio.

Show only the list of Gpio bits with the mode value and function name.

=back

=head2			Field Modification

These options specify the field names and value to be set and are applied
to all Gpios specified.

=over

=item B<--InOver_2>=0       - Input override.

Specify the input signal treatment from the pin to the peripheral device.

    0= Normal
    1= Invert the input
    2= Low  - force input to logic 0
    3= High - force input to logic 1

=item B<--OutOver_2>=0      - Output override.

Specify the output signal treatment from the peripheral device to the pin.
Only the device selected by B<FuncSel_5> is routed to the pin.

    0= Normal
    1= Invert the output
    2= Low  - force output to logic 0
    3= High - force output to logic 1

=item B<--OutEnOver_2>=0    - Output Enable override.

Specify the output enable signal treatment from the peripheral device to the
pad driver.
Only the device selected by B<FuncSel_5> is routed to the pin.

    0= Normal
    1= Invert the enable signal
    2= Low  - disable output
    3= High - enable output

=item B<--FuncSel_5>=0      - Function select {0..31}.

Select which peripheral device is connected to the pin.  Device output (and
enable) is connected to the pad driver.  The pad receiver is likely buffered
to all device inputs for that Gpio regardless of function select.

 Values {0..8} typically have peripherals.
 Values {9..30} are all reserved.
 Value  {31} is "null", no device, is the power-on condition.

=item B<--func>=0           - Alias for --FuncSel_5 above.

=back

=head2			Options

=over

=item B<--show>             - Show all alternate functions.

Output a table of all alternate functions {a0..a8} for the specified Gpio
pins.  No Gpios are modified.

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.

Show actions taken as the command executes, on stdout.

=back

=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 Show Gpio0..27 by default.
 % rgpio fsel5

 Show selected Gpio
 % rgpio fsel5  7 6 5 4
 % rgpio fsel5  --gpio=0x000000f0

 Show only table or list portion of output
 % rgpio fsel5  --table
 % rgpio fsel5  --list   0 1 2

 Set Gpio pins to function select mode 'a5' sRIO[] (system Register IO).
 % rgpio fsel5 --func=5  4 5

 Configure Gpios for normal input/output operation.
 % rgpio fsel5 --InOver_2=0 --OutEnOver_2=0 --OutOver_2=0  4 5

 Show all alternate functions.
 % rgpio fsel5 --show

 Reset RPi header pins Gpio[27:0] to the power-on 'null' mode.
 % rgpio fsel5 --func=31 --gpio=0x0fffffff


=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		SEE ALSO

B<rgpio>(1)
B<rgpio-header>(1)
B<rgpio-rio>(1)
B<rgpio-rcon>(1)
B<rgpio-fsel>(1)
B<librgpio>(3)

 RPi5:  Raspberry Pi RP1 Peripherals (2023-11-07)
     https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rp1/rp1-peripherals.pdf

=cut

