# 2019-12-30  William A. Hudson

# rgpio-clk -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgpio-clk -- Clock Generator control

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 rgpio clk [name..] [options..]
  name:  (multiple ok)
    -0, -1, -2          Clk0, Clk1, Clk2
    --pcm               PCM clock manager
    --pwm               PWM clock manager
  modify:
    --Cntl=0x5a000000   set control register
    --Divr=0x5a000000   set divider register
    --Mash_2=0          MASH mode {0..3}, 0= integer division
    --Flip_1=0          1= invert output, 0= normal
    --Busy_1=0          1= clock generator is running (RO)
    --Kill_1=0          1= stop and reset, 0= no action
    --Enable_1=0        1= enable, 0= stop
    --Source_4=0        set clock source {0..15}
    --DivI_12=N         set divisor integer,  {0..4095}
    --DivF_12=N         set divisor fraction, {0..4095}, for MASH
  options:
    --raw               no disable before modification
    --help              show this usage
    -v, --verbose       verbose output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

Configure the Clock Generators (Clock Managers in BCM doc).
See B<rgClk>(7) manpage for hardware description.

=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			Clock Name

These options specify which clock manager to operate on (default Clk0).
Multiple can be specified at the same time.

=over

=item B<-0>                 - Clk0    general purpose clock

=item B<-1>                 - Clk1    general purpose clock

=item B<-2>                 - Clk2    general purpose clock

=item B<--pcm>              - ClkPcm  feeds the Pulse Code Modulator

=item B<--pwm>              - ClkPwm  feeds the Pulse Width Modulator

=back

=head2			Modify

These options modify the specified bit field.  Any unspecified fields
remain unchanged.  The default password (Passwd_8= 0x5a) is always applied.
If no modification options are specified, the hardware register values are
simply read and displayed.

=over

=item B<--Cntl=0x5a000000>  - Set control register.

=item B<--Divr=0x5a000000>  - Set divider register.

=item B<--Mash_2=0>         - Mash mode {0..3}, 0= integer division.

=item B<--Flip_1=0>         - Invert output, 1= invert, 0= normal.

=item B<--Busy_1=0>         - 1= clock generator is running (RO).

=item B<--Kill_1=0>         - 1= stop and reset, 0= no action.

=item B<--Enable_1=0>       - 1= enable, 0= stop.

=item B<--Source_4=0>       - Set clock source {0..15}.

=item B<--DivI_12=N>        - Set Divisor integer,  {0..4095}.

=item B<--DivF_12=N>        - Set Divisor fraction, {0..4095}, for MASH.

=back

=head2			Options

=over

=item B<--raw>              - No disable before modification.

Directly apply the register modifications (with default Passwd_8).

Without --raw, the clock is first disabled, then wait for not busy, then
apply registers without simultaneous enable, then enable if requested.

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.

Shows actions taken as the command executes.

=back

=head1		OUTPUT

Output values are always the final register values re-read after all
modifications.
Example output (on stdout) for one clock generator looks like:

 Clk0:				# clock generator name
   0.Cntl    = 0x00000096	# full register values
   0.Divr    = 0x003ff000
   0.Mash_2    = 0		# field values
   0.Flip_1    = 0
   0.Busy_1    = 1
   0.Kill_1    = 0
   0.Enable_1  = 1
   0.Source_4  = 6
   0.DivI_12   = 1023
   0.DivF_12   = 0

=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 View clock configuration of Clk0 and ClkPwm.
 % rgpio clk -0 --pwm

 Clear clock registers.
 % rgpio clk --Cntl=0 --Divr=0

 Modify register fields.
 % rgpio clk --Source_4=6 --DivI_12=1000

 Use --raw for exploring literal changes.
 % rgpio clk --raw --Source_4=6 --Enable_1=1

 Set Divr register fields
 % rgpio clk --DivI_12=0xf DivF_12=0xd
 % rgpio clk --Divr=0x0000f00d

=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		FILES

In the source directory tree:

 librgpio/src/rgClk.h
 librgpio/src/rgClkMan.h


=head1		SEE ALSO

B<rgpio>(1),
B<rgClk>(7),
B<rgClk>(3),
B<librgpio>(3)

 BCM doc:  BCM2835 ARM Peripherals (2012)
 Chapter 6.3 "General Purpose GPIO Clocks" (p.105-108).
 https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bcm2835/BCM2835-ARM-Peripherals.pdf

=cut

