# 2018-06-30  William A. Hudson

# rgpio-fsel -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgpio-fsel -- Pin Function Select

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 usage:  rgpio fsel [options..]  [N..]
    N                   bit number 0..53
  show bit number groups:  (accumulate)
    -0                  word 0, bits [31:0] (default)
    -1                  word 1, bits [53:32]
  modify:
    --mode=In           set mode {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5}
    --w0=0xffffffff     word 0 mask, bits [31:0]
    --w1=0x003fffff     word 1 mask, bits [53:32]
  options:
    --show              show all alternate functions
    --help              show this usage
    -v, --verbose       verbose output
    --debug             debug output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This command displays the Function Select mode of each GPIO pin specified.
Here "pin" or "bit" refers to the GPIO bit number, not the Raspberry Pi
header pin number.

The output shows the alternate function {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5},
along with the peripheral function signal name.
The signal names generally have a prefix indicating the peripheral they
belong to.  Special names indicate:

    --  = reserved
    **  = do NOT USE, may have unexpected results

If modification is requested with B<--mode>, the process for each bit (or
Fsel register mask group) is:

    0) Identify the Fsel register containing that bit.
    1) Read current hardware register value.
    2) Modify the mode bits.
    3) Write modified value back to hardware register.
    4) Re-read hardware register and display the bit mode.

A list of bits [N..] are processed one bit at a time, while a
mask option (e.g. --w0) is processed one Fsel register at a time.

Note this read-modify-write sequence is not atomic.  It is left to the user
to avoid synchronization issues.

=head2			RPi5

RPi5 has only B<--show>, and no modify capability.
Only Gpio[27:0] of Bank0 are displayed.
RPi5 has a completely different register structure that is not practical to
combine with RPi4 and earlier.


=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			Bit Number Groups

These options are an alias for a list of pin numbers,
matching the word0 and word1 bits of the B<rgpio-io> command.
They are usable only for reading, not modification.

=over

=item B<-0>                 - Word 0, pins Gpio[31:0] (default)

=item B<-1>                 - Word 1, pins Gpio[53:32]

Note that only Gpio[27:0] are accessible on the Raspberry Pi 40-pin header.
The others may be accessible on Raspberry Pi compute modules.

=back

=head2			Modify

The pins to be modified are specified either by the argument bit number list,
or by the word mask options B<--w0>, B<--w1>.

=over

=item B<--mode=>In          - Set mode {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5}.

Set the mode for the specified pins.
The default at power-on reset is "--mode=In".
Beware of what each pin is connected to when changing its mode to avoid
potential drive fights.

=item B<--w0=>0xffffffff    - Word 0 mask, bits [31:0]

=item B<--w1=>0x003fffff    - Word 1 mask, bits [53:32]

The word value is a bit mask, where ones specify which bits to change
to the B<--mode> value.

=back

=head2			Options

=over

=item B<--show>             - Show all alternate functions.

Output a table of all alternate functions {Alt0..Alt5} for the specified
pins.  No pins are modified.

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.

Shows actions taken as the command executes.

=back

=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 Show pins 0..31 by default.
 % rgpio fsel

 Show all pins.
 % rgpio fsel -0 -1

 Set Gpio pin 12 to Output.
 % rgpio fsel --mode=Out  12

 Set Gpio pins 14..17 to Alt5 UART1 function.
 % rgpio fsel --mode=Alt5  14 15 16 17
 % rgpio fsel --mode=Alt5  --w0=0x0003c000

 Show all alternate functions for all pins.  No pins are modified.
 % rgpio fsel --show -0 -1
 % rgpio --rpi4 fsel --show -0 -1

 Reset RPi header pins Gpio[27:0] to Input.
 % rgpio fsel --mode=In --w0=0x0fffffff


=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		FILES

In the source directory tree:

 librgpio/src/rgFselPin.h
 librgpio/src/rgAltFuncName.h


=head1		SEE ALSO

B<rgpio>(1)
B<rgpio-header>(1)
B<rgpio-io>(1)
B<librgpio>(3)

 BCM doc:  BCM2835 ARM Peripherals (2012)
    p.102-104  6.2  Alternative Function Assignments
    https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bcm2835/BCM2835-ARM-Peripherals.pdf

 BCM doc:  BCM2711 ARM Peripherals (18 Jan 2022)
    p.77-81  ch 5.3  Alternative Function Assignments
    http://datasheets.raspberrypi.org/bcm2711/bcm2711-peripherals.pdf

=cut

