# 2023-02-14  William A. Hudson

# rgpio-header -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgpio-header -- Header Pin Functions, by pin number on 40-pin header

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 usage:  rgpio header [options..]  [N..]
  header pin list formation:  (choose one)
    [N..]               header pin numbers 1..40, default all
    --gpio  [N..]       Gpio bit numbers   0..27, default all
    --signal            signal header pins
    --power             power  header pins
    --row               header pins by row, odd first then even
  modify:
    --mode=In           set function mode {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5}
  options:
    --show              show all alternate functions
    --help              show this usage
    -v, --verbose       verbose output
    --debug             debug output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This command displays the Function Select mode of each GPIO pin specified.

Essentially it is active documentation mapping the 40-pin header pins
to Gpio bit numbers that are acted upon using the B<rgFselPin> class.
As such, it is equivalent to the B<rgpio-fsel> command, but restricted to
only the Gpio pins on the 40-pin header (Gpio0 .. Gpio27), making it somewhat
safer.

It is the only B<rgpio> command to use header pin numbers, all others use
Gpio bit numbers.

=head2			Output Tables

Output tables show the header pin numbers staggered, with the even numbers
indented to suggest the two row header.

Normal output shows the header Pin number, the Gpio name {Gpio0 .. Gpio27},
the alternate function Mode {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5}, and the Function name.
Power pins are shown as {+3.3V, +5V, GND} in the Function column, where
"GND" is a Ground connection.  e.g.

 Pin   Gpio    Mode  Function
  3    Gpio2   In    input
    4  --      --    +5V

With --show, the table columns show the header Pin number, the Gpio name
(or the Power pin name), and the six alternate function names
{Alt0 .. Alt5}.  The current pin function is not shown.
It is intended to show all the possible peripheral functions available
on each pin.  e.g.

 Pin  Gpio    Alt0       Alt1    Alt2       Alt3       Alt4    Alt5
  3   Gpio2   iic1_SDA   sm_A3   dpi_VSYNC  spi3_MOSI  u2_CTS  iic3_SDA
    4 +5V     --         --      --         --         --      --

The alternate Function names generally have a prefix indicating the
peripheral they belong to.  Special names indicate:

    --  = reserved, or a Power pin
    **  = do NOT USE, may have unexpected results

Note:  RPi4 (BCM2711) introduced additional instances of IIC, SPI and UART,
and moved the Slave I2C bsc_* alternate functions.

=head2			Modification

If modification is requested with B<--mode>, the process for each bit is:

    1) Read current hardware register value.
    2) Modify the mode field for that bit.
    3) Write modified value back to hardware register.
    4) After all bits are modified, re-read registers for display.

Note this read-modify-write sequence is not atomic.  It is left to the user
to avoid synchronization issues.


=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			Pin List Formation

Argument numbers [N..] are header pin numbers, except with --gpio they
are interpreted as Gpio bit numbers.
The order given on the command line is preserved in the output tables.
Default behavior is to list all 40 pins in header pin number order.

=over

=item B<--gpio>             - Gpio bit numbers (0..27)

Interpret argument numbers [N..] as Gpio bit numbers, instead of header
pin numbers.
With no argument numbers, list all signal pins in Gpio bit number order.
Not valid with --signal or --row.

=item B<--signal>           - Signal header pins

List all signal pins in header pin number order.
Argument pin numbers [N..] are not allowed.
Not valid with --gpio or --row.

=item B<--power>            - Power  header pins

List all power pins in header pin number order.
Argument pin numbers [N..] are not allowed.
Not valid with --row.

=item B<--row>              - Header pins by row, odd first then even

List all header pins by row.
Argument pin numbers [N..] are not allowed.
Not valid with --gpio or --signal or --power.

=back

=head2			Modify

All signal pins in the specified pin list are modified, power pins are
ignored.  This is reasonably safe (unlike B<rgpio-fsel>), as none of the
header pins are used by the operating system.
Be aware of pin connections when changing mode to avoid potential drive fights.

=over

=item B<--mode=>In          - Set function mode {In, Out, Alt0, .. Alt5}.

Set the mode for the specified pin list.
The default at power-on reset is "--mode=In".
Not valid with --power or --show.

=back

=head2			Options

=over

=item B<--show>             - Show all alternate functions.

Output a table of all alternate functions {Alt0..Alt5} for the specified
pin list.  No pins are modified.

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.

Shows actions taken as the command executes.

=back

=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 Show pins 0..40 by default.
 % rgpio header

 Show all signal pins ordered by header pin number {0..40}
 % rgpio header --signal

 Show all signal pins ordered by Gpio bit number {0..27}
 % rgpio header --gpio

 Show/modify selected pins in given order
 % rgpio header               23 19 21 24 26
 % rgpio header --show        23 19 21 24 26
 % rgpio header --mode=Alt0   23 19 21 24 26

 Set Gpio bits 14..17 to Alt5 UART1 function.
 % rgpio header --mode=Alt5 --gpio  14 15 16 17

 Show all alternate functions for all pins.  No pins are modified.
 % rgpio        header --show
 % rgpio --rpi4 header --show

 Reset all header pins to Input.
 % rgpio header --mode=In


=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		FILES

In the source directory tree:

 librgpio/src/rgHeaderPin.h
 librgpio/src/rgFselPin.h
 librgpio/src/rgAltFuncName.h


=head1		SEE ALSO

B<pinout>(1)
B<rgpio>(1)
B<rgpio-fsel>(1)
B<rgAltFuncName>(3)
B<rgFselPin>(3)
B<rgHeaderPin>(3)

 Raspberry Pi hardware - GPIO and the 40-pin Header
    https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/raspberry-pi.html

 Raspberry Pi Pinout
    https://pinout.xyz/#

 BCM doc:  BCM2835 ARM Peripherals (06 February 2012)
    p.102-104  6.2  Alternative Function Assignments
    https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/bcm2835/BCM2835-ARM-Peripherals.pdf

 BCM doc:  BCM2711 ARM Peripherals (18 Jan 2022)
    p.77-81  ch 5.3  Alternative Function Assignments
    http://datasheets.raspberrypi.org/bcm2711/bcm2711-peripherals.pdf

=cut

