# 2021-03-13  William A. Hudson

# rgpio-pads -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rgpio-pads -- Pads Control

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 rgpio pads [options..]  [REG..]
    REG = { PadsA_27s0, PadsB_45s28, PadsC_53s46 }
  modify register:
    --value=V           set register value
  modify fields:  (of REG..)
    --Passwd_8=0x5a     password (default)
    --SlewMax_1=0       1= max slew rate, 0= limited
    --HystEn_1=0        1= hysteresis enabled, 0= not
    --DriveStr_3=0      drive strength (0..7) = (2 mA .. 16 mA)
  options:
    --help              show this usage
    -v, --verbose       verbose output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

This command accesses the Pads Control registers that control receiver
hysteresis, driver slew rate, and driver strength.

Register and field names are the same as in the "rgPads" class
(see file rgPads.h) and are listed in the register group options below.
The names are a little long, but aid in the use of the librgpio library.

See B<rgPads>(7) for hardware behavior.


=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			Register Names

The Gpio pins are grouped into 3 banks, with one register per bank.
All pins in a bank have the same configuration.

=over

=item B<PadsA_27s0>    Gpio[27:0]     28 bits

=item B<PadsB_45s28>   Gpio[45:28]    18 bits

=item B<PadsC_53s46>   Gpio[53:46]     8 bits

=back

=head2			Modify Options

These options modify the specified field for each register named in the
argument list.
Any unspecified fields remain unchanged.
If no modification options are specified, the hardware register values are
simply read and displayed.

If modification is requested, the process for each register is:

    1) Read current hardware register value.
    2) Replace with whole register option --value, if specified.
    3) Modify bits according to field options.
    4) Write modified value back to hardware register.
    5) Read hardware register and display resulting value.

The default password (B<Passwd_8>= 0x5a) is applied unless option B<--value>
is given.

=over

=item B<--value=>0x5a000000 - Set whole register value.

No default password is applied.

=item B<--Passwd_8=>0x5a    - password (default)

The default value is applied only if other field options are specified, i.e.
no need to explicitly specify the default password.

=item B<--SlewMax_1=>1      - 1= max slew rate, 0= limited

A high slew rate allows toggling at higher frequencies, but can cause
increased ringing.

=item B<--HystEn_1=>1       - 1= hysteresis enabled, 0= not

Hysteresis helps reject ringing on a fast edge, and noise on a slow input edge.

=item B<--DriveStr_3=>3     - drive strength (0..7) = (2 mA .. 16 mA)

Effectively configures the number of parallel MOSFETs in the pad driver.
For each setting, the nominal maximum current that will still meet the output
drive voltage specification is given in the table.

 0=  2 mA
 1=  4 mA
 2=  6 mA
 3=  8 mA  (power-on reset)
 4= 10 mA
 5= 12 mA
 6= 14 mA
 7= 16 mA

=back

=head2			Options

=over

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.

Shows actions taken as the command executes.

=back

=head1		OUTPUT

Output values are always the final register values re-read after all
modifications.
Example output (on stdout) for one register looks like:

 Pads Control register:            28   24   20   16   12    8    4    0
 0x0000001b  PadsA_27s0          0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0001 1011
    Passwd_8    = 0x00
    SlewMax_1   = 1
    HystEn_1    = 1
    DriveStr_3  = 3

=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 View all configuration registers.
 % rgpio pads

 View one register.
 % rgpio pads  PadsA_27s0

 Modify fields.
 % rgpio pads -v  --DriveStr_3=4  PadsA_27s0

 Explore explicit password.
 % rgpio pads  --Passwd_8=0x99 --DriveStr_3=7  PadsA_27s0


=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		FILES

In the source directory tree:

 librgpio/src/rgPads.h


=head1		SEE ALSO

B<rgpio>(1),
B<rgPads>(7),
B<rgPads>(3),
B<librgpio>(3)

 GPIO pads control,  Gert van Loo 2-August-2012.
    http://www.scribd.com/doc/101830961

    https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/hardware/raspberrypi/gpio/gpio_pads_control.md

=cut

